---
layout: archive
title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---

Thanks to my Master's degree in political science, major in international
relations, I started developing multidisciplinary studies and links with Chile.
My Master's thesis thus focused on the internationalisation of the Mapuche and
tried to show how their international mobilisation produced a diversity of
feelings of belonging.

This first research project led me to carry out two stays in Chile: the first
was a professional internship at MINREL, and the second was a research stay in
Temuco, with the aim of interviewing various Mapuche actors or those linked to
them. My doctoral research began in 2018 with the continuation of the study of
the Mapuche, although I broadened the perspective by integrating the case of
Bolivia and the Aymaras into the analysis. I retained in my doctoral thesis the
historical approach that I started in my dissertation. However, instead of
pursuing the relationship between identity construction and
internationalisation, I focused on the right to self-determination in order to
explore the political novelty that indigenous peoples introduce to this
principle once it is appropriated. In this way, I delved into the relationship
with the state and established a comparative framework of the most different
cases between Bolivia and Chile.

I also insisted on the importance of the international arena and the
transformation of law that indigenous peoples achieved through their
mobilisation. To conduct this analysis, I undertook a four-month internship,
from September to December 2019, at the Indigenous Peoples and Minorities
Section (IPMS) of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR). There I was able to observe the participation of indigenous
peoples in the UN and contribute to the training given to them to deal with the
international legal arena. Trips to Bolivia and Chile complemented this first
field trip. From January to April 2020, I was able to conduct more than 80
interviews in both countries and consult press archives in order to gather
historical material.

I am currently developing a research project on the contestative value of the
right of self-determination and the way in which it challenges the international
hierarchy. To do this, I propose to develop two case studies. First, I explore
dependency theories and how they helped Latin American countries develop their
foreign policy in the 1970s. Second, I analyse the right to self-determination
of indigenous peoples as a principle of political autonomy and how it contests
state sovereignty.
